Rn45380 (#6223)
SkylineCommunications/dataminer-docs: develop/devguide/GQI_Extensions/GQI_Extensions_Discrete_Values.md

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Each discrete value (the underlying value, not the name) must be unique within the column. Providing duplicate values will result in an error.

Pass the discrete options to one of the column constructors that accepts them:

```csharp
// A string column with a fixed set of values
new GQIStringColumn("Status", new GQIDiscreteOptions<string>(new[]
{
    new GQIDiscrete<string>("Active", "active"),
    new GQIDiscrete<string>("Inactive", "inactive"),
    new GQIDiscrete<string>("Pending", "pending"),
})),

// A numeric column with exception values alongside a continuous range
new GQIDoubleColumn("Percentage", new GQIDiscreteOptions<double>(new[]
{
    new GQIDiscrete<double>("Error", -1),
    new GQIDiscrete<double>("Not Available", -2),
}, isStrict: false)),
```

> [!NOTE]
> Within custom operators, the discretes of existing columns can be read but not altered.

## Cell values for discrete columns

> When creating a cell for a discrete, only the Value of that discrete needs to be specified. The name of the discrete will automatically be used as the display value. Any other DisplayValue on the cell will be ignored.

Reviewer: Use code style when using property names

```suggestion
When creating a cell for a discrete, only the `Value` of that discrete needs to be specified. The name of the discrete will automatically be used as the display value. Any other `DisplayValue` on the cell will be ignored.
```

## Strict vs. non-strict

The `IsStrict` property on [GQIDiscreteOptions\<T\>](xref:GQI_GQIDiscreteOptionsT) indicates whether the column values come exclusively from the discrete list (`true`) or whether the discretes represent known values alongside a broader range (`false`). When omitted, it defaults to `true`.

> [!WARNING]

> > When using strict discretes, providing a cell value that does not match any configured discrete value results in an error.

Reviewer: This warning gives a bit the impression that this is either a short-coming or that there is additional danger when using strict discretes, while in fact it is something we want to encourage.

Maybe we can point out the (potential) benefits of using strict discretes whenever possible and reword the warning more as an !IMPORTANT note?
E.g. something like "Only cells with discrete values and empty cells are allowed in a column with strict discretes. If any other value is provided, the query will fail to execute."

---
uid: Ad_hoc_Discrete_Values
---

> # Defining discrete values for columns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Defining discretes for a column
```

> Available from DataMiner Web 10.6.7/10.5.0 [CU16]/10.6.0 [CU4] onwards.<!-- RN 45380 -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From DataMiner Web 10.6.7/10.5.0 [CU16]/10.6.0 [CU4] onwards<!-- RN 45380 --> it is possible to define a set of **discretes** when creating a column. Discretes are predefined, named constants for values that can occur in the column. They improve the user experience when filtering and can allow more optimizations.
```

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > This feature requires the [GQI DxM](xref:GQI_DxM) and the [Skyline.DataMiner.Core.GQI.Extensions NuGet package](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Skyline.DataMiner.Core.GQI.Extensions). It is not available through the SLAnalyticsTypes API.

Reviewer: We should link here to the page that explains the new API instead of directly to nuget.org. Then we also don't need to repeat that it won't work with SLAnalytics.

When defining columns in an ad hoc data source, you can optionally associate a set of **discrete values** with a column. These discrete values are exposed to the client and can be used in filter editors, making it easier for users to filter data by selecting from predefined options rather than typing values manually.

> ## When to use discrete values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## When to use discretes
```

> Discrete values are useful in two scenarios:

Reviewer: This is very subtle, but the wording feels off.
It's not that in some cases discretes shouldn't be used or aren't useful but rather that they can only be used in exactly two ways.

```suggestion
Discretes can be used in two ways:
```

> - **Columns with a fixed set of values**: For example, a "Status" column that can only be *Active*, *Inactive*, or *Pending*. Defining these as discrete values enables users to select from a dropdown when filtering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For columns that can only contain **a fixed set of values**. For example, a "Status" column that can only be *Active*, *Inactive*, or *Pending*.
```

> - **Columns with special exception values**: For example, a numeric measurement column where most values fall within a continuous range (e.g. 0–100), but specific values have a special meaning (e.g. `-1` means "Error"). Defining these exception values as non-strict discretes surfaces them as quick filter options alongside the standard numeric filter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For columns that may contain **a fixed set of special or exceptional values alongside regular values**. For example, a numeric measurement column where most values fall within a continuous range (e.g. 0–100), but specific values have a special meaning (e.g. `-1` means "Error"). Defining these exception values as non-strict discretes surfaces them as quick filter options alongside the standard numeric filter.
```

> ## How to define discrete values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How to define a column with discretes
```

Use the [GQIDiscreteOptions\<T\>](xref:GQI_GQIDiscreteOptionsT) class to configure the available discrete values for a column. Each individual discrete value is defined using the [GQIDiscrete\<T\>](xref:GQI_GQIDiscreteT) class, which pairs a value with a display name.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Each discrete value (the underlying value, not the display value) must be unique within the column. Providing duplicate values will result in an error.

> Pass the discrete options to one of the column constructors that accept them:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pass the discrete options to one of the column constructors that accepts them:
```

```csharp
using Skyline.DataMiner.Core.GQI.Extensions;

public GQIColumn[] GetColumns()
{
    return new GQIColumn[]
    {
        // A string column with a fixed set of values
        new GQIStringColumn("Status", new GQIDiscreteOptions<string>(new[]
        {
            new GQIDiscrete<string>("active", "Active"),
            new GQIDiscrete<string>("inactive", "Inactive"),
            new GQIDiscrete<string>("pending", "Pending"),
        })),

        // A numeric column with exception values alongside a continuous range
        new GQIDoubleColumn("Temperature", new GQIDiscreteOptions<double>(new[]
        {
            new GQIDiscrete<double>(-1, "Error"),
            new GQIDiscrete<double>(-2, "Not Available"),
        }, isStrict: false)),

        // A column without discrete values
        new GQIStringColumn("Description"),
    };
}
```

## Strict vs. non-strict

The `IsStrict` property on [GQIDiscreteOptions\<T\>](xref:GQI_GQIDiscreteOptionsT) indicates whether the column values come exclusively from the discrete list (`true`) or whether the discretes represent known values alongside a broader range (`false`). When omitted, it defaults to `true`.

> [!NOTE]

> > The `IsStrict` setting currently does not affect how the client presents the filter UI. Regardless of this setting, **numeric** discrete columns are generally handled as non-strict (allowing free-form input alongside discrete options) and **string** discrete columns are generally handled as strict (presenting only the discrete options). This behavior may change in a future release.

Reviewer: I'm hesitant to mention any specific client behavior in this part of the docs. It will be hard to keep up-to-date and technically should be independent of any particular GQI client.

## Supported column types

Discrete values are supported on all column types:

- `GQIStringColumn`
- `GQIIntColumn`
- `GQIDoubleColumn`
- `GQIBooleanColumn`
- `GQIDateTimeColumn`

> - `GQITimeSpanColumn`

Reviewer: No point in specifying this if there is no reason. It just becomes another place we have to keep in sync if new column types are added.

new GQIStringColumn("Description"),
```

> [!NOTE]
> Within custom operators, the discretes of existing columns can be read but not altered.

## Strict vs. non-strict

The `IsStrict` property on [GQIDiscreteOptions\<T\>](xref:GQI_GQIDiscreteOptionsT) indicates whether the column values come exclusively from the discrete list (`true`) or whether the discretes represent known values alongside a broader range (`false`). When omitted, it defaults to `true`.

> [!NOTE]
> The `IsStrict` setting currently does not affect how the client presents the filter UI. Regardless of this setting, **numeric** discrete columns are generally handled as non-strict (allowing free-form input alongside discrete options) and **string** discrete columns are generally handled as strict (presenting only the discrete options). This behavior may change in a future release.

## Cell values for discrete columns

When a cell value for a discrete column matches one of the configured discrete values, DataMiner uses the corresponding discrete name as the cell display value.

In other words:

- If you provide a display value that differs from the discrete name, it is replaced by the discrete name.

> - If you do not provide a display value, it is automatically set to the discrete name.

Reviewer: Could be worded a bit more straightforward as a feature:

When creating a cell for a discrete, only the `Value` of that discrete needs to be specified. The name of the discrete will automatically be used as the display value. Any other `DisplayValue` on the cell will be ignored.

> When using strict discretes, providing a cell value that does not match any configured discrete value results in an error.

Reviewer: This info should be part of the Strict vs. non-strict section.

```

> [!NOTE]
> Within custom operators, the discrete values of existing columns can be read but not altered.

## Cell values for discrete columns

> When creating a cell for a discrete value, you only need to specify the `Value` property of the discrete value option. The `Name` property of the discrete value option will automatically be used as the display value. Any other `DisplayValue` on the cell will be ignored.

Author: This would be probably be better as "When creating a cell for a discrete value, you only need to specify the `Value` property of the discrete value. The `Name` property of the discrete value will automatically be used as the display value. Any other `DisplayValue` on the cell will be ignored."
It does not really make sense to call it a "discrete value option" here.
Otherwise LGTM
